And hello everybody, welcome to The Book Guys, our inaugural occasion.
Delighted to be speaking with you from the studios of WAMU in Washington, where The Book Guys is recorded live on tape, making it easier for you to participate.
I'm Mike Cuthbert.
And our special guest every week, our co-host is Alan Stipek, the owner of Second Story Books here in Washington, D.C.
And we do, well, we're going to tell them what we do.
Alan, good to see you.
Good to see you tonight, Mike.
We have done this, we should mention, several times before here in Washington on both commercial and public radio stations as separate episodes of a talk show that I formerly had.
And frankly, this is a program that just had to come to the air nationally because people kept telling us it had to be.
It was perfect for public radio.
Well, we got very good response from the shows for now 15 years.
And every time we're on, we get a lot of interesting questions and we try to give a lot of interesting information back to the audience.
The ground rules are very simple, folks.
This is all you have to do.
When you call the book guys and when you're on the air with us, just be sure you have your book with you.
That's all.
A book that is probably used.
Now, as you'll find out as we go along, some of the used books may be only a year old because it turns out, Alan, that the value of a book doesn't always depend just on its age.
No.
The listeners should understand that a book that might be printed in the year 1700 will be worth a lot less than a book that was published six months ago.
And we're going to give you many examples of that.
As we go along week by week.
Well, actually, you'll give us examples of that because it's your books that we talk about.
Now, to get involved with the book, guys, it's very simple.
As I mentioned, we record live to tape, which means that our answering service takes calls at 1-800-828-BOOK.
And during the week before a broadcast, our producer goes through all the calls, picks the first several that appeal to her, and you get on the air.
We call you at home.
It's a very convenient, easy way to get on the radio, and we have a good time.
The guideline we've got to mention to you, though, is that neither Alan or I are going to know what these books are about.
Alan, in fact, is almost nutty on the subject.
Well, no, I'm passionate about it.
I do not want to have one piece of knowledge before a person calls in, because I really want to feel that the listeners understand that I'm going along with them, and I want them to ask me every question they can conceive of, and if they stump me, so much the better.
Now, we have had some really success stories on here.
I suppose the biggest one, Alan, for the book guys when we were just doing a segment was the lady who called about Gone with the Wind.
No question.
What happened in that case?
Well, a woman called us, and it must be a year ago, and said that she had an inscribed copy of a first edition of Gone with the Wind by Margaret Mitchell.
Now, what's the difference between an inscription and a signed copy?
Well, Sign Company would simply have the signature of the author in it.
An inscription could be anywhere from yours very truly, Margaret Mitchell, to a five-page inscription talking about the book.
And in this situation, the Margaret Mitchell inscription was a ten-line poem in hand by Margaret Mitchell of the fall of the South.
Though that was printed in 1865,
There was also a, not printed in 1865 by Margaret Mitchell, but was previously published.
She copied that, but did have enclosed in the book a four-page letter on her personal stationery discussing the creation of the book, the writing of the book Gone with the Wind, stating to her friend that she was now in the middle of a nervous and physical breakdown due to the pressures put on her by her publisher, Macmillan, to get the final draft on the book.
talking about what the book was about.
This is a phenomenal source letter.
And we were able to sell that book with the inscription and the letter for $15,000 for this person, who I understand using it for very good purposes.
She put a couple of her kids through school for a couple of years.
Now, we're not going to guarantee that's going to happen every week, but it happens periodically.
So let's find out if our listeners, you at home,
have some valuable books or not.
Along the way, we're just going to have a lot of fun talking about one of our favorite activities, and that's reading.
Because eventually, whether or not the book is worth thousands of dollars or not, if it's not worth reading, it's probably not worth having.
But have you seen a book that could be described as that other than a blank one?
What?
That's worth reading?
Oh, there's a lot of books that I personally wouldn't read, but...
I'm not saying that somebody out there would.
But, you know, every book has its person that will want to buy one or to feel it's worth something.
We just want people to understand that if we say a book is valueless, that doesn't mean it is not important for the individual.
It just means on the market, it just doesn't have any resale value.
On the current market, because one thing I've learned is never assume that today's book that isn't worth much is going to be tomorrow's book that isn't worth much.
Oh, no question.
I mean, we can use examples like...
The Bridge Over Madison County.
This is a book which came out in a limited edition printing.
The publisher didn't anticipate the book would be popular, but it was skyrocketed.
And now a first edition of that book sells for over $300.
Even though there's millions of them out there?
Well, the first edition there aren't millions.
The first print run probably was $2,500.
And that's a perfect example of books which come out
which the publisher didn't anticipate the popularity of John Gresham, A Time to Kill.
The first edition of that book was 1,500 copies.
Now that book sells for almost $2,000 or $2,000, depending on what bookseller has it.
So let's go to our phones and talk with some of you about your books.
Let's go first to Washington, D.C.
Rudy, you're on with the book guys.
Hi there.
Whoops, let me put Rudy on the air.
Hi, Rudy.
Hi.
Can you speak a little louder?
This is not the greatest connection.
Sure, we got you.
How do you hear us now?
Much better, thank you.
Okay.
What have you got for us, Rudy?
Well, I've got something that isn't even in English.
But what I've got is a complete set of the works of Goethe, which is, in fact, in 56 volumes, although fairly small ones.
The size cover is about three and a half inches by five and a quarter inches.
It's his complete works, although there may be one with two little things missing because, in fact, it appeared before he died.
This is dated 1828.
He died in 1832.
Apart from that, these are his complete works, which were printed, as I say, in 1828.
by something called the Kotta bookshop.
I guess they did their own printing also.
Now, the thing is, I speak German, but I won't be here forever.
My children do not speak German.
I have heard, how reliably, I don't know,
that this could be worth something either here or in Germany.
Do any thoughts come to you?
Yes, it could be worth something here or in Germany.
You're correct about that.
A set of Goethe that early automatically is going to have value because it was published during the author's life.
Now, in the set, do the individual volumes have different dates on them, or are they all dated the same year?
I think they have different dates with the last one, I believe, shortly after his death.
Well, that will indicate that probably some of the volumes are first editions, and they were published as the author wrote the individual work.
That is possible, yes.
It's probable, to be honest.
What are the books bound in?
Are they bound in contemporary leather?
No, it is bound in something you would probably be able to tell immediately.
It looks like parchment paper.
something like that, very thick paper with a kind of a brown pattern on it.
I don't think it pretends to be leather, with a pattern almost like you might find in some types of marble.
Right.
Those are marbleized boards.
They're cloth boards that probably have some vellum in it.
Vellum is goat skin, and if it looked like parchment and it felt like, would you say, does it feel like skin?
Have you ever seen vellum?
You've got it exactly, yes.
Okay.
It's probably bound with a cloth board over it to kind of act as an extra reinforcement.
It's not abnormal for that time period, especially in Germany and in France.
Does that kind of cover, does that have to be contemporary?
Oh, it's definitely contemporary.
That is probably the publisher's binding.
Now, probably what happened was when that book was published,
the or the set was published that it came into two variant bindings one which is the boards that you have which would be an inexpensive binding and then depending on the subscriber an individual who wanted a more deluxe binding they would get a leather binding that could be anywhere from a quarter leather to a full leather binding and then the the elaboration on that binding being you know a full morocco versus just a regular calf binding yes I'm almost sure that it is not leather I do have some some older German books which are bound in full leather
And the binding is, the covering rather, is falling apart.
I guess the American climate doesn't agree with it too much.
Whereas these look as good as they must have looked the day they were published.
All the bindings are the same then.
All the bindings are the same, the whole set, correct?
Right.
Well, I'm going to just hazard a guess.
I mean, I don't have a reference book here that would have that individual set that I could tell you right off the top of my head.
But a set like that would sell for thousands of dollars.
I don't know how many thousands of dollars.
It could be a thousand.
It could be three thousand.
What you'd have to do is get in touch with a competent bookseller in your area.
What we suggest is that you contact the ABAA at 50 Rockefeller Plaza in New York.
One moment, let me get that down.
50 Rockefeller Plaza.
in New York?
New York, zip 10020.
I am a member of the ABAA, and I highly refer anybody who calls in to use the ABAA, which is a national organization.
There are 450 dealers around the country.
They can supply you with a directory, or if you want, you can call 1-800-
828 book, and we would be happy to send you a copy of the directory because we keep them in stock.
And so you'd be getting the opportunity to look through the directory and find booksellers in your specific area that could help you get a true value on it.
Alan Rudy brought up something interesting.
He said that it's probably worth something here or in Germany.
Is this the kind of set that it would be worth Rudy's time to go to Germany to try to sell?
Well, I wouldn't say it's... I mean, if you want to take a trip to Munich and this is...
Great opportunity to use an excuse, but quite frankly, with the way telecommunications are, I think a fax would suffice, and certainly you could contact the ILAB, which is the International League of Antiquarian Bookmen, which the ABAA is the American organization, and you can get an ILAB directory, again, from 50 Rock, and they can give you the names of all the booksellers in Germany.
And believe me, all those booksellers would love to get a set of Goethe.
It's a very popular time period in German literature.
German books sell very well in both the states, and I know so many American dealers, including myself, that are frequently sending over to Germany faxes of books that we pick up.
And there is a very strong market.
I see.
And an international one.
Oh, sure.
You could FedEx the set.
I mean, one of the beauties of the fact that we now have Federal Express and other overnight companies, and we have the faxes and the Internet...
is that book selling has become a touch kind of business, and people can now sell books in foreign languages to the areas that are indigenous, and it's really picking up the market.
In the late 80s, Japan was where everybody sold their books.
I mean, the Japanese were feverish in their attempt to buy every known book on Earth.
Including non-Japanese books?
Oh, especially non-Japanese books.
You would go to any auction house around the world, and you would see every Japanese bookseller in the first or second row with their paddles up, not putting them down for anything.
How interesting.
Rudy, we thank you very much for your call.
And I thank you, and I'll follow your suggestions.
Very good.
Thanks very much.
Good talking to you.
That's Rudy with a complete set of Goethe.
And we should mention, we didn't mention at the start, that foreign language is perfectly fine with us.
Oh, sure.
More exciting things happen in foreign languages.
Sanskrit.
Especially French.
Robert, good day to you, and welcome to the book, guys.
Hello, Robert.
Are you talking to me?
We certainly are.
Okay, I'm here.
Okay, what have you got for us?
Well, I've got a book.
The title of it is With a Prehistoric People by Rutledge and his wife, and it discusses his living in East Africa and writing a history, and been one of the first ones to write a history of the Kukuku in Kenya.
And I got it while I was there, and I just wondered if it was any value at all.
Okay, Rutledge, this was what, published in about 1940?
Which Rutledge was this?
1928, I think.
Okay, and the first name of Mr. Rutledge?
W. Scoresby.
And this is on, would you say this is a colonialist point of view of the world of Kenya?
Well...
Probably because the reason I got it at Kenyatta College, when the Africans took over the college and discovered that it was a book about the kukuyu, they did not like the way it was written.
And so that's how I got a hold of it, because it was going to be destroyed.
Right.
Now, just on the book itself, is it a cloth-covered book with a pictorial cover, which normally was the kind of book that would be published that time?
Cloth cover, but it has nothing on the cover at all.
Really, most probably what you have is the trade copy, not the deluxe copy.
Because quite frankly, we handle a lot of books pertaining to the history of Africa, colonialism, etc.
And the majority of the books of that time period usually are issued with a pictorial cover.
Robert, we've got to take a slight break.
We're going to leave you on the line and solve the problem of the kukuyu in just a moment.
We're the book guys.
We're the book guys, Alan Stipek, and I'm Mike Cuthbert.
Robert has challenged us with a book written in Africa by William Scoresby Rutledge, or W. Scoresby Rutledge, I guess I'm assuming the William.
Alan, what more can you tell us about the likelihood of this book?
He's the brother of Archibald Hannibal Rutledge, who is also a famous author of African Travels, including an American hunter.
Great.
white safari man, and I would hazard a guess that that book is worth somewhere between $35 and $100.
Now, we just picked up a big collection of books on Africa, and quite frankly, it's very interesting to see the difference between books written by the indigenous peoples of that time period, especially in Kenya.
You have writings by Kenyatta when he was in Paris and in London, and by people who were living in Kenya who were white colonialists.
Boy, there are two separate points of views to the country.
For sure.
Oh, yes.
Well, I've read Kenyatta's book, so I'm well aware of that.
But this is different.
This is more like from an anthropologist's point of view.
Yeah, but do you think it's accurate, sir?
I think so, yes.
Okay, you know, you have to do some research.
I would say the book is between $35 to $100.
Okay.
Robert, thank you very much for calling us.
You're welcome.
Thanks a lot.
We're the Book Guys in Washington, D.C.
Mike Cuthbert and Alan Steipek.
We're talking used and rare books, and you can see how it goes.
It gets very unusual.
Let's go to Boca Raton in Florida.
Max, you're on with the Book Guys.
Hello to you.
Hello, Max.
Are you there?
There he is.
Sure.
Yes, I'm here.
Didn't punch the button hard enough.
Oh, all right.
Now I'm here.
What have you got for us?
I have here a four-volume set of translation of Don Quixote de la Mancha, translated by somebody called Motteux, M-O-T-T-E-U-X.
And published in Boston by Little Brown and Company in 1854.
It's four octavo volumes, leather bound, in a sort of tan leather.
Gee, there's only one of possibly 2,000 different editions of Don Quixote published between 1840 and 1875.
Really?
Very popular book written in the 19th century.
Very popular book written in the 17th century.
And then the 20th century.
It sounds like it's just a general reading copy of one of the many translations with an illustrator.
The name doesn't really strike a bell as being a highly collectible book, and I would hazard a guess that it's probably worth because of the leather.
Is the leather in good condition?
Reasonable for the age.
Okay, and the size of the book, sir?
Octavo.
It's funny.
If you could give me two minutes, let me explain what's happened with the definition of book sizes.
Book sizes used to be defined by the actual pagination of the book.
An octavo was eight pages to a signature.
Now, everybody out there who doesn't know what a signature is, that's how a book is bound.
It's bound in signatures.
And that's the paper folded over.
Now a quarto would be bound in signatures of four pages each.
Now they're taking books by the size, and they actually even have a ruler, which actually tells you the size of the book by using the ruler.
So a book that's X amount of inches in height is now a folio.
If it's a little small, it's a quarto.
If it's smaller, then that's an octavo, down all the way down to the itsy bitsy 64mo, or the miniature books.
And now, to me, that's the improper way of defining a book.
A book is defined by size, by the pagination, by the signatures.
So when you say octavo, are you talking about the size of the book or by the signatures?
Well, the page size is four and a half inches by seven inches.
Well, yeah, that would be, at this point, a regular octavo.
But that's by its size.
Now...
See, he's being a purist with you, Matt.
Yeah, I am being a purist, and I'm not trying to sound condescending.
It's just a very peculiar problem that booksellers have when they're cataloging because you're going to have one person who identifies a book in a catalog as being an octavo by size when, in fact, it could be a quarto or a royal quarto in its real sense.
But the bottom line is the book you have is probably worth between $100 to $250 if the leather's in good condition.
Oh, good.
All right.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Max.
Okay.
Good night.
Every week at around this time, about the middle of our program, we're going to bring you somebody very, very special.
Nicholas Basbaines is going to join us because... Whoa!
Hello.
Nick has written a book that is, I don't know which printing, we'll find out from him, but it's a fascinating book called A Gentle Madness, and it's all about collecting books.
Nick is in his home in Boston, Massachusetts.
He joins the book guys.
Nick, how are you?
I'm fine, Mike.
How are you?
Very good to have you with us.
Hi, Nick.
Hi, Al.
It's a pleasure to be with the book guys tonight.
Now, every week you're going to just give us a visit into your world, tell us some stories about either book collectors that you know, book collecting that is going on, or you can even dip into your own book if you would like to tell some of the stories like
Well, I must admit, the greatest story in your book about St.
Cuthbert, but we'll get to that another time.
What's happening in your world that you'd like to share with us this week, Nick?
Cute story.
I was signing books this past weekend at the Boston Antiquarian Book Fair up here, and at one time I had a nice long line.
I must have had 15 or 20 people waiting for books.
And this young man, I would guess about 12 years old, came right to the front,
and asked me a question.
He said, excuse me.
He said, do I have to buy something to get a signature?
And I looked at him.
I said, do I look like Reggie Jackson?
Do I look like Greg Maddox?
Would you like me to... But it's kind of cute, isn't it?
Incredible.
I signed a card for him.
I even asked him his name, and I asked him if he liked books.
Hold that thought for just a minute.
We have to tell folks that we're the book guys in Washington.
Okay, go ahead, Nick.
Now, at that same signing, what do people talk about when they ask you to sign their book?
They haven't even read it yet.
Why are they getting it?
A number of people, I have to say.
I was on an interview with Brian Lamb on C-SPAN, which aired about a month ago, and it's amazing how many people watched that program and indicated that they had
They had seen me there, and many of them had even already purchased the book and were there to get first editions because the ABAA, which sponsors these book fairs, had the foresight, I guess, to buy up quite a few first editions of my book, which has now gone into the fourth printing.
And so they were there to get signed first editions.
How does it feel, Nick, to know that your first edition signed is now selling for more than the published price?
And how long has your book been out?
The book was published officially in August.
It was available in late July.
As I understand it, the first printing was gone within three days.
While we were still within our first month of publication, there were three printings ordered.
That's your question.
It's wonderful.
I see.
So, you know, I can just tell you that Second Story is cataloging your first edition now for more than the list price, and people are desperate for copies of it.
Music to my ears.
Speaking of Second Story, I'm going to Toledo this week.
Question.
Okay, quiz.
What's the first thing you do when you go into a city you've never been into before?
Personally?
Yeah.
Go to a bookstore.
What else?
It sounds like a setup.
No, the first thing I do is I check the yellow pages to find out where all the bookstores are.
The first thing I do is double-check to make sure my hotel room has a king-size bed.
I would say the first thing I do is check into my hotel.
But, I mean, I think the real book nut always wants to know where the second-hand bookstores are.
I love the second-hand bookstores.
And the antiquarian guys, I know who they are, and I'll see them later.
But, boy, you go to those second-hand places, you never know what you're going to find.
And I'm going to Toledo this weekend.
And what are you doing in Toledo, Nick?
Well, he asked and he answered.
I've been invited out there by the friends of the Toledo Public Library to talk about my book.
I write a weekly book column.
That's carried, it's syndicated in 25 newspapers or so, and I write about new books and authors, so the blade out there in Toledo takes my column, and so I'm kind of known out there, I guess, and I'll be out there talking about a gentle madness.
I hope you'll bring us some stories from Toledo when you come.
It would be my pleasure.
All right, Nick, good luck, and thanks for joining us.
We'll see you next week at the same time.
Thanks, Mike.
Thanks, Alan.
Good luck.
Bye-bye.
Nick Basbane is author of A Gentle Madness, a book about collectors through history, published by Henry Holt.
You know, I'd say something about Nick.
I just have to tell you, since he's come on the scene with this book, he has breathed such a breath of fresh air into book collecting.
He is so overwhelmed by the market and by everybody who collects books that he's made us more aware of who we are.
And, I mean, I just got to tell you that...
To see him sign a book, he just doesn't sign your book.
He inscribes every book.
And I've seen him online with 100 people, and he has spent three to five minutes coming up with an inscription.
And the last time in Boston, he said, you know, inscribing books takes a lot of time, you know, but he still does it.
We're going to take more calls in just a moment here at The Book Guys.
Our number is 1-800-828-BOOK.
And you use that number simply to call, register your name, and the book that you've got.
When you call, just give us the title, the author, and the publisher.
The year would be helpful as well to help guide us a little bit as to what's happening with your books.
We'll then get you on the radio in the next week or so, and you'll be part of The Book Guys.
As a matter of fact, we're the book guys in Washington.
Let's go to Massachusetts.
And Gene, you're on with the book guys.
Hello to you.
Gene, are you there?
Hello, Gene.
Let me try once again.
There she is.
I'm right here.
There you go.
Jean, go ahead.
Thanks.
My father has given my husband a two-volume set of a handbook of American Indians, and he handed it over as though it had some value.
And we wondered if maybe Al could help us describe a monetary...
value to my father's love for my husband.
Are we talking Catlin's Handbook of American Indies?
This is not Catlin's, no.
This is a Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, printed in 1907 in Washington.
Okay, it's got the green bindings?
No, it's tan.
They're both two tan leather bindings with what looks like vellum inserts.
Really?
The spines are tan leather in exquisite condition.
And there are about 2,200 pages worth of, but there is a two-volume set.
Wow.
You know what that sounds like?
That sounds like every year the Bureau of American Ethnology comes out through the Smithsonian with a handbook on American Indians.
And that went from about J.D.
Powell, J.W.
Powell, excuse me.
Right.
was the compiler, the editor.
And I believe it started in about 1879 and went through about 1916 and then sporadically has been issued under another editing head.
They sell the individual annual years, will sell anywhere from $25 for a bulletin up to $250 for a bulletin.
An individual volume like the one on the Hopi dolls or the Kachina dolls sells now up to about $500.
And then other ones just on Indian dresses or Indian dances, Indian music, will sell for $150 to $250.
It sounds like what you have is a compilation of a variety of the years that were issued prior to 1907 in a deluxe binding by the Smithsonian.
And I'm going to hazard a guess.
I mean, I really think that's what you have.
And if that's the case, I would say it's probably worth... This is a leather set?
Yes, it is.
I would say it's worth at least $400.
Wonderful.
Now, wait a minute.
The government printed something that's worth $400?
Well, the government printed stuff that was worth more than $400.
I mean, this is a remarkable set of books.
If you had the whole collection, you would probably be looking at...
A $10,000 investment, $15,000 investment.
Another example of the government printing something that's very valuable are the Pacific Railroad surveys.
Fifteen volumes that came out in 1852 to 1855 with color plates in the back of the birds that were indigenous to the southwest.
Again, Indian textiles, animals.
Those books now sell for the 15 violence for about $4,000.
Jean, what's the subject of this handbook?
Is it all Indians, or is there a special feature in 1907?
No.
No, it's all Indians.
It's an alphabetical listing through two volumes of, I suppose, every known tribe or group.
But they're North American.
These are North American Indians.
Right, so that's what Powell's was.
Is it edited by Powell's by any chance?
The first volume, it is edited by Frederick Webb Hodge.
And it doesn't say Powell's at all?
Not on this particular one, no.
Okay.
I'm still going to stand by my price.
I'm pretty sure that's what it would sell for, about $400.
Well, great.
Thank you very much.
Good night.
The curious thing, I guess, to me is I've seen some of these handbooks, and most of them are in a very businesslike green cloth binding, not very exciting.
And yet we've got leather here.
The government does the leather, huh?
Oh, sure.
They had special bindings that were issued to subscribers or to special people in leather, or, in fact, a person could have rebounded in leather after the fact.
I have just opened up and found the book, okay?
And, in fact, it is published by the Bureau of American Anthology, and it was bulleted number 30, and it came out in 1907, and the final binding was 1910.
All right, so one of the later ones.
Let's go to...
Let's see.
Well, first of all, let's just remind you that we're the book guys.
Alan Stipek, I'm Mike Cuthbert, the Book Guys in Washington, D.C., going to Virginia.
And Sally, are you there?
Yes, I sure am.
Hi, Sally.
What have you got for us?
Hi.
Well, I've got a volume here.
It might actually comprise two volumes.
I'm not really sure.
The Poetry of Samuel Johnson and also the Poetry of John Pomfret.
And these were published by C. Cook, No.
17, Paternaster Row in London.
They've got engraved, as I say, it's one volume, but from a listing that's in the back of the book.
It appears that originally these were sold in separate editions, published at either six pence or a shilling apiece.
So those are poor man's editions.
Yeah, actually they even describe it as, let me see here.
Common folk edition?
Plan of Cook's Uniform Cheap and Elegant Pocket Library.
Right, okay.